backend/
│
├── src/
│   │
│   ├── config/
│   │   ├── db.js
│   │   └── redis.config.js
│   │
│   ├── models/
│   │   ├── userModel.js
│   │   └── 
│   │
│   ├── routes/
│   │   ├
│   │   └── userRoutes.js
│   │
│   ├── controllers/
│   │   ├
│   │   └── userController.js
│   │
│   ├
│   │   
│   │  
│   │
│   │
│   ├── middlewares/
│   │   ├── authUser.js
│   │   ├── error.js
│   │   └── services.js
│   │
│   ├── utils/
│   │   ├── logger.js
│   │   ├── mailer.js
│   │   └── 
│   │
│   ├── app.js
│   └── server.js
│
├── .env
├── .gitignore //.gitignore file is a plain text file placed in a Git 
                  repository that tells Git which files or directories to ignore and not track.
├── package.json
└── README.md



Request →
  httpLogger (logs request)
    →
  route/controller/service
    →
  throw AppError or Error
    →
  errorLogger (logs error)
    →
  errorHandler (sends response)




await:The operation is asynchronous, allowing the program to
 handle other tasks while the salt is being generated.

 async:
mongodb password:5r8KOxQ7WrVUX7GW

password for otp generator:ffgm wbxb gdhw rszb



User logs in → 
backend verifies credentials → 
bcrypt checks password → 
JWT token is generated →
token is sent to frontend → 
frontend sends token in headers for protected APIs →
middleware verifies JWT and allows access.



When a user registers, the backend first validates the email and password,
 hashes the password for security, and creates the user with a verification 
 status set to false. It then generates a one-time password (OTP) 
 with a short expiry time and sends it to the user’s email. 
 The user must enter this OTP to verify their email, 
 after which the backend marks the account as verified 
 and removes the OTP. Only verified users are allowed to log in.
 During login, the backend checks the credentials and issues a JWT token,
 which the frontend uses to access protected routes.

If a user forgets their password, 
the backend again generates an OTP and emails
it to the user for identity confirmation. Once the OTP is verified,
the user is allowed to set a new password, which is hashed and saved 
securely in the database. This ensures that email ownership is
confirmed both during registration and password recovery,
while JWT handles secure login sessions afterward.


 200 OK, 201 Created, and 204 No Content
 400 Bad Request, 401 Unauthorized, 403 Forbidden, and 404 Not Found 
 500 Internal Server Error, 502 Bad Gateway, 503 Service Unavailable, and 504 Gateway Timeout 


 We use Pino instead of Winston because Pino is faster, lightweight, and produces
  structured logs by default, making it better for high-performance Node.js applications.
   Winston is more flexible but heavier and slower for large-scale logging.


utils/logger.js: creates one common logger (Pino). This is the main character that prints structured logs to terminal.


middlewares/httpLogger.js: logs every request automatically (method, URL, status code). So you can track which API was hit and what response status it gave.

middlewares/errorLogger.js: logs every error (message + stack + route info). This helps you debug without relying only on the client response.

middlewares/error.js (global error handler): sends a clean JSON response to the client when any error happens, so your app doesn’t crash and responses stay consistent.

Services/Controllers can also log important events (example: “OTP sent”) using the same logger.


Server side Rendering::Server-side rendering means the server sends pre-built HTML to the browser for faster load 
and better SEO instead of rendering everything with JavaScript.”




new update 
Part 3: User Status Management

Objective:

Allow Admin to control whether a user can access the system.

Requirements:

Add a status field to user (Active, Suspended, Deactivated).

Allow Admin to change user status.

Prevent Suspended or Deactivated users from logging in.

Show proper message when login is blocked (e.g., “Account suspended. Contact admin.”).

Store suspension reason.


Technical Considerations:

Check user status during login process.

Also verify status in auth middleware for protected routes.

Ensure status updates are saved in database.

Write basic tests for login restriction based on status.

Part 4: Maintenance Mode Access Control

Objective:

Allow the system to restrict access during maintenance or system updates.

Requirements:

Implement a global “maintenance mode” flag.

When enabled, block access for all Users.

Allow only Admin to access the system during maintenance.

Return a clear message (e.g., “System under maintenance. Please try later.”).

Allow Admin to toggle maintenance mode securely.


Technical Considerations:

Store maintenance flag in database or secure config.

Check maintenance status in global middleware.

Prevent unauthorized users from toggling maintenance mode.

Write tests for access behavior during maintenance mode.




Part 5: Real-Time User Presence & Live Status Tracking (Socket Layer)


Objective:

Track which users are online, offline, idle, or in a restricted state — in real time.


Requirements:

Presence states

Online

Offline

Idle (no activity for X mins)

Suspended (real-time forced disconnect)

In-call / Busy

Real-time updates


UI badge: green/gray/yellow/“Suspended/User Removed”


Admin Controls:

Admin can view live presence map

Admin can force-disconnect any user from socket

Disconnect Suspended/Deactivated Users

If their status changes → socket server immediately emits “forceLogout”

Client should auto redirect to login


Technical Considerations:

Store presence in Redis (socketId → userId)

Heartbeat pings to detect idle state

Middleware: authenticate JWT in handshake

Emit “presence_update” events globally or to specific rooms


Part 6: Notification System for User Status Changes

Objective:

Improve UX by informing users & admins about system events.


Requirements:

Notify user via email/SMS when:

Account suspended

Account deactivated

Account reactivated

Notify admins when:

Maintenance mode enabled

Maintenance mode disabled


Notification templates: 

Queue-based sending (BullMQ / Redis)






Socket = persistent two-way connection
Socket.IO = easy library to use sockets
socket.id = unique connection identifier
Multiple tabs = multiple sockets
Disconnect = socket closes
Heartbeat = activity signal



overrall workflow after implementing socket 

user logs in -->backend generates jwt token-->frontend stores token-->
create(Socket(token))-->io(url ,auth token)
--->handshake request sent -->auth middleware -->
token=socket.handshake.auth.token--->jwt verified --->socket user created --->redis will map socket id with user id -->now for every user private rooms are created 
-->for admin special admins room created --->socket logic implementation